---
layout: post
title: Configuring LDAP and StartTLS
date: 2017-01-12 03:45:56
disqus: y
---

### Introduction

This post serves as a point of demarcation between completed steps and steps in progress. If you're following along, installing OpenLDAP is step 4 (more or less). Everything up to this point was a challenge for me but certainly not insurmountbale. OpenLDAP, on the other hand, has been the most obtuse thing I've tackled so far. With some time, however, I was able to establish some steps that produced reliable results for setting OpenLDAP.

---

Starting with a fresh VM with a CentOS 6 minimal image, install all of the packages necessary for running OpenLDAP:

```
$ sudo yum install openldap-clients pam_ldap nss-pam-ldapd pam_krb5 sssd migrationtools openldap-servers openldap openldap-devel
```

Next, move `/etc/openldap/certs` and create a new certificate directory:

```
$ sudo mv /etc/openldap/certs{,_bak} && sudo mkdir /etc/openldap/certs
```

This directory will serve as the `moznss` certificate database for OpenLDAP. `certutil` is used to manage this directory; its analogues would be `openssl` and GnuTLS tools such as `certtool`. `moznss`'s effectiveness for certificate management seems to be debatable. When browsing OpenLDAP lists while troubleshooting, I noticed many instances of OpenLDAP developers disparaging this method as buggy and inconsistent. I'm certainly no expert but I decided to go with the default version of OpenLDAP available in the CentOS repositories, and that happened to use `moznss` as its certificate management method.

Prepare the directory for `certutil`:

```
$ echo "<password>" > password
$ echo "<type randomly>" >> noise.txt
```

The database needs a password if exportation of a root certificate is necessary. Move the password file to the `certs` directory and associate it with the database:

```
$ sudo mv password /etc/openldap/certs
$ sudo certutil -N -d /etc/openldap/certs -f /etc/openldap/certs/password
```

Generate a new key pair for the root certificate:

```
$ sudo certutil -G -d /etc/openldap/certs -z noise.txt -f /etc/openldap/certs/password
```

Generate the root certificate:

```
$ sudo certutil -S -n "CA certificate" -s "cn=CAcert" -x -t "CT,," -m 1000 -v 120 -d /etc/openldap/certs -z noise.txt -f /etc/openldap/certs/password
```

Use the newly created root certificate to sign and generate a certificate for the LDAP server:

```
sudo certutil -S -n "OpenLDAP Server" -s "cn=ldap1.example.com" -c "CA certificate" -t "u,u,u" -m 1001 -v 120 -d /etc/openldap/certs -z noise.txt -f /etc/openldap/certs/password
```

Export the root certificate so that it can be used later:

```
$ sudo pk12util -d /etc/openldap/certs -o cacert.p12 -n "CA certificate"
```

Keep in mind that this is the certificate used to sign the server certificate; keep it secure and use a good password to encrypt it. Export the CA certificate for use by LDAP clients:

```
sudo certutil -L -d /etc/openldap/certs -n "CA certificate" -a > cacert.pem
```

Make all files readable in the certificate database directory:

```
$ sudo chmod 644 /etc/openldap/certs/*
```

Enable `ldaps://` by editing `/etc/sysconfig/ldap` with your favorite text editor:

```
<snip>
SLAPD_LDAPS=yes
</snip>
```
